The most successful people in the world don’t sit idly by and waste time. Bill Gates was so busy, he even dropped out of college to focus on his growing business. Time is the most precious resource and must be used properly above everything else. Not even money can buy more time in this world, so what time people have should be used well. People should always be trying to do something because people should capitalize on the limited time they were given, and because it is most helpful for One’s self and the people around them to be useful with their time.
        People should not waste their time because they only have so much time, and time will not wait for anyone so they should act with the time they have. There are only limited opportunities to do things, such as for many students, only after school and after clubs. Assuming a student has about two hours of homework per day, that leaves about five hours in which a student can pursue their hobbies, and that does not include clubs or other obligations. Five hours is a good amount of time but not a particularly long time to pursue hobbies and such, which might force things a student is doing to be dragged out much longer than would be normally anticipated for whatever the student might be doing. If a student looks more into the future, five hours may be a lot of time compared to however much free time having college and/or a job could afford. Therefore, one should be mindful of what time they have currently and use it well, as it may not last into the future
        So that One can become a useful person benefitting all the people around them, they must pursue opportunities while they are able. Getting extensive education or volunteering expertise in any subject requires years of time, and it generally also takes years to meaningfully apply that expertise to be of benefit to people. This leaves a relatively short window in which people can pursue opportunities in the fields of their interests. If One manages their time well, they can spend 40 or maybe 50 years in their field. With 40 or 50 years, One would be of great benefit for the people around them. Experience adds up to improve skills, so with experience comes the extra wisdom of how to excel in their expertise, increasing that person’s usefulness even further.
        One might say that there will be time in the future to do these things, I should not worry about this immediately. That is only an excuse for procrastination. No one can tell what will happen in the future, and the future should not be talked about so definitively. Maybe new circumstances will happen that prevent you from having as much time as you would have before, no one can tell. Instead of taking a gamble on what might happen in the future, use your time wisely in the present, while it is not a gamble and it may be known definitively how much time one has
        In conclusion, people should always spend their time well, and take advantage of the time they have while they have it. Everyone has a limited lifespan and a limited time for pursuing and applying knowledge. If people do not pursue opportunities while they can, it will be a large source of regret for them in the future. Furthermore, to be of any use in the field of their interest, people should gain as much expertise and education as they can with their time so that they can succeed not only in their career, but as a person who took advantage of the time they had. The most important lesson that can be learned from life is to never be idle; always continue to learn and grow as a person.