This article with the headline, “Venezuelan general backs Guaido and urges mass protests as Maduro calls for early elections” by Peter Stubley explains the crisis in Venezuela following the defection of a general in the Venezuelan air force. The president of Venezuela, Nicolas Maduro, was accused of rigging the elections in his favor in the 2018 Venezuelan elections in an effort to try to hang on to his power. His extremely unpopular regime has even military members defecting, and the military was Maduro’s biggest supporter. A temporary new interim president, Juan Guaido, had proclaimed he would take on the role of president until things can be settled. The general who defected made his support to the interim president clear in the video detailing his defection from the armed forces.         
        This article can be compared to the power that corrupts Macbeth, which also similarly corrupted Maduro in Venezuela. It has a very negative to society. It is the thing that allows despots to cling to their power and continue their miserable and oppressive reigns of terror. The reign of despots is something that does not need much explanation. Despots always follow the same general principle that they care minimally for the subjects they rule and do a bare minimum of service towards people. Their only interest is to keep their power and influence and maintain a luxuriously wasteful lifestyle which only benefits them while people’s suffering remains at the back of their minds.
        In Macbeth, Macbeth had to get rid of all of the opposition to his throne. In his case, that meant murder but if Maduro were to murder someone or really in any modern political situation, murder is a very extreme option that will likely see other countries band together against Maduro or whatever leader committed murder to gain power. So in Maduro’s case, where Macbeth murdered opponents, Maduro imprisoned dissidents. Both are practically the same, but nonetheless different. Maduro is also losing everything at this point. People that were among his closest supporters are dropping their support rapidly and very soon he will have no supporters if he does not change how he is handling things. In a very similar way to Macbeth, it is almost as if Maduro has lost all focus on reality to desperately try to cling to power, no matter the cost. He even rejects humanitarian aid! Macbeth had lost sight of what was really happening and stuck behind the veil of his power hungry subconscious, had his close friend killed to silence potential contesters to his bloody throne.